F29 Retaliator - Manual
F-29 RETALIATOR SCENARIO

A new and deadly breed of fighters is taking shape in the secret workshops
deep in the American West. The Advanced Tactical Fighter F-22 and the Forward
Swept Wing F-29. They will convey one message to the enemy - the Retaliators
are effective, deadly and meet the threats of 21st Century warfare.

Their pilots will have a dangerous mission: to penetrate bands of surface to
air missiles, destroy hostile AWACS and radar, launch ground strikes at enemy
resources, armies, installations and communication links, and to break up
hostile aids before they reach friendly territory. Their bases will be under
air and missile attack from H-hour + zero. They must destroy four or more
hostiles for every loss in order to survive and win.

AIRCRAFT DATA
Retaliator is a flight simulator program based upon two of the most
revolutionary aircraft designs ever conceived: The Lockheed F22 Advanced
Tactical Fighter and Grumman F29. The Grumman F29 has been developed as a
technology demonstrator towards creating the ultimate fighter aircraft and was
a genuine contender for the USAF's new advanced tactical fighter but is now
unlikely to enter service as it was judged too risky and too costly in terms
of performance for the ATF. However new studies have shown a forward swept
wing STOVL (Short Take-Off and Vertical Landing) multi-role supersonic fighter
which could be feasible in the late 1990's thanks to improved engine
performance. The F29 shows great potential for the next generation advanced
tactical fighter, around 2007 to 2012.

Background to the new ATF
In 1979, the USAF first thought of a new advanced
tactical fighter to replace the F-15, whilst the Navy replace the F-14.In 1981
the first step towards a new fighter was taken when the ASD asked the American
aircraft developers "request for information", and their views on a new
aircraft to be called the Advanced Tactical Fighter. From studies on the ATF
it was clear that the most important attributes for it were: STOVL - Short
Take Off and Landing.

STEALTH - Radar Invisible

SUPERCRUISE - Supersonic persistence without using any afterburner

In 1986 Lockheed, General Dynamics and Boeing announced an agreement that they
would team up to develop an ATF if one of their proposals was selected. Two
weeks later Northrop and McDonald Douglas announced a similar arrangement. Two
main designs had been picked for the fly-off competition: The Lockheed F22 and
the Northrop F23. The FSWX-29 by Grumman was shut out at this stage. The first
flight for the F22 (which is now the favourite contender for the ATF) was set
for the Autumn of 1989 in California. Full production will commence in 1994 at
a cost (in 1989 terms) of 60 million dollars per unit.

Technical Information on the F22 and F29 ATF
The ATF flies at mach 1.4 to 1.5 (930 to 1000 mph) on dry thrust with full
armament and cruise at a greater altitude than current fighters; 70,000 ft as
opposed to 50,000 ft in the High Fast Sanctuary with less threat against SAMs
and at supersonic speed covering the ground from 75% faster than a subsonic
cruise type, reducing the fighters exposure time by a factor of 3 in the
shrunken danger zone.

The ATF combat radius is 700 to 920 miles - a significant increase over the
F-15.It would be able to take-off from a 2,000 ft runway or rough surfaces and
easier to maintain than the F-15. Being slightly heavier than an F-15 (around
60,000 lbs), the ATF has the same wingspan but is slightly longer to
accommodate the extra fuel load. Great use is made of wing to body blending
like the F-16, SR71 and B1, again providing more internal volume for fuel and
weapons.

For its stealth capabilities the ATF is made with RAM (Radar Absorbent
Materials). It is also designed to reduce the radar cross section by a factor
of 100 compared to the F-15.

The engines are Pratt and Whitney XF119 with vectoring and reversing nozzles,
having the advantage in all flight regimes as well as increasing the
manoeuvrability. Reversing nozzles remove the use of large air brakes.

The control surfaces (flaps, canards and rudders) and the vectoring nozzles on
the ATF work together under the control of powerful computers to give the
impression of flying a straight-forward simple plane. The actual aircraft will
be so complex and have so many flight modes that the pilot would not be able
to exploit them all. The pilot issues a command and the system will interpret
it, i.e. if the pilot pulls back sharply on the stick the control system will
first deflect the vectoring nozzles upward and the MAW flaps (Mission Adapted
Wing) downward, to rotate the fuselage and start the aircraft into the
manoeuvre.

The basic argument for supermanoeuvrability (the ability to turn at low air
speed at high G's within a very small radius) is that an aircraft which cannot
emulate such a manoeuvre can be prevented from bringing its weapons to bear.

MAIN SELECTION COMPUTER (Start up sequence)

1. The Enrol Data Bank
Here you enrol to the USAF and select your rank. The ranks available from the
lowest to the highest rank are as follows:

   First Lieutenant - Captain - Major - Lieutenant Colonel - Colonel

The higher the rank selected,the more variety of mission will be available.
More points are awarded to the higher rank for the same mission as the game
will be harder (see scoring). To return to the main menu, press either return
of click on OK or Cancel with the mouse.

2. Choose Your Scenario
On this screen you are given the choice of four different locations. Three of
these locations will involve you in the wars that are taking place in those
areas. The four scenarios are:

a) Arizona
You are assigned to the USAF Test Range Arizona where you will be given the
controls of the new ATF and the new F-29. The test range is approximately 1000
sq. miles and contain various targets and remote control mobile vehicles. This
world is a true simulation of a hostile environment.

b) The Middle East
Several F-22's and F-29's are currently engaged in a fierce war with two other
countries. The friendly nations artillery is, however, heavily outnumbered
although it is technically superior to its rivals. Consequently in order to
succeed, three enemy planes must be destroyed for every one friendly aircraft
destroyed.

The War is on two fronts, with large tank battles to the South West and
artillery exchanges across the natural river boundary to the South East. The
ATF Squadron is based near the capital Tel-A-Von.

c) The Pacific Ocean
The strategically important volcanic islands of Solomos provide vital oil
supplies to the USA, and is the only deep sea port for 1000 miles in all
directions. A small military airstrip is located there with a squadron of
ATF's.

A military blockade by the enemy has cut-off all support to the islands,
threatening the vital oil supplies to the USA and is ready to invade the
islands.

A task force from Guam led by USS JF Kennedy is steaming towards the war zone
with two squadrons of F-22's, F-18's and F-29's.

d) Europe 196 the Ultimate Battle Front
The diplomacy has failed and the world is about to plunge into another world
war. A full scale conventional war across the heartland of Europe will begin.
All airfields, installations, factories and towns will be attacked and initial
losses are expected to be heavy on both sides.

The NATO forces have been mobilised and put on full alert, as have all air
bases will all squadrons being dispersed away from vulnerable bases. Mounting
enemy activity has been reported near the border where an estimated 9000 tanks
and 3 million soldiers have amassed.

The enemy is expected to launch a massive assault on key points along the
border and its airforce will plunge deep into your country crippling the
infra-structure.

Two enemy tank divisions have assembled along the border with huge
reinforcements being drawn up from their rear flanks. The situation will be
critical if the enemy mobile tank division break through the border defenses
as they will plunge deep into your territory threatening the industrial
complexes at Huttgart, Nurgen and Coberg.

To select your scenario press key 1,2,3 or 4.

3. View Sierra Hotel Pilots
This screen shows the top ten highest scores achieved by pilots. These scores
are saved automatically. Press RETURN or click the OK button with the mouse to
return to the main menu.

4. View Pilots Log
The game disk is designed to store all the statistics of one pilot e.g.his/her
number of missions completed; name; rank; score and awards.

To clear this log press ESCAPE and all data will be erased for a new pilots
log. It is also cleared if the pilot is killed or retires.

5. Load Pilots Log
This loads up the previously saved log of the game.

6. Zulu Alert
Zulu Alert provides a quick entry into the game.

You are given unlimited weapons and begin a "shoot-em-up" game in your
selected scenario, starting in mid-air flight against a squadron of enemy
fighters. No points are awarded and no log information is saved to disk as
this is merely a practise exercise.

7. Mission Control
Selecting this option puts you into the mission control section of the game.

When entering Mission Control you are provided with the latest update of the
war situation in your chosen scenario (except American world) with a detailed
map showing the battle front and text describing the latest events in the war.
War updates are provided after every four or so mission, dependant on your
scenario.

Press RETURN to access the Mission Control options screen.

MISSION CONTROL SELECTION MENU

1. Select Plane
Using the mouse, point the cursor on the panel below the plane you wish to
select; clicking once on the appropriate panel will select the plane and
return you to the Mission Control menu.

2. Select Base
Using the mouse, point the cursor on an airfield located on the map. Clicking
with the left button on an airbase provides you with a text description of the
base and clicking again on the same base will confirm this as your home base
in the game; i.e. starting location.

3. Select Armament
See Weapons and Stores

4. Choose Mission
Here you are provided with a selection of missions, the number of which is
dependant on three factors; your rank, your location and how long into the war
you are. Simply select a number.

5. Accept Mission
This puts the player directly into their chosen scenario. It is essential that
all aircraft, weapons, mission scenarios etc have been selected prior to
accepting a mission as the default status will be totally inadequate for the
scenarios you will be presented with.

On entering the 3-D section of the game you are shown a welcome screen
appropriate to your location. Here you have the option to abort by pressing
ESCAPE and return to Mission Control. Any other key will start the mission.

END GAME
At the end of the game whether you fail or complete your mission, or are
killed or retire you are returned to the main computer bank where you are
given a quick debriefing of the mission and your current statistics. Pressing
any key to continue will then return you to the Mission Control selection
screen.

WEAPONS AND STORES
The F-22 and F-29 boast a wide and awesome variety of weapons. For air to air
and air to ground missions the weapons are selected by clicking on the left
mouse button over the appropriate weapon (to deselect, click RH button). Both
planes have a limited payload and are restricted to 11000 pounds on the ATF
and 9000 pounds on the FSW.

Weapons are subject to availability,dependant on your base, location and rank.
Shortages will become likely further into the wars. Both planes have seven
pylons (the ATF has four external and thee internal pylons in a bomb bay to
reduce drag).

Maximum Stores Per Pylon (diag.)
                                 /\
                           /(~~~~ATF~~~~)\          ----- This is supposed
                      --+---+---+---+---+---+---+--       to be a bloody
                                                          plane! hem hem
                      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
AIR TO AIR            |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
Backwinder-9x         | 1 |   |   |   |   |   | 1 |
AIM 9M-R Sidewinder   | 1 | 1 | 1 |   | 1 | 1 | 1 |
AIM132 ASRAAM-N       | 1 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 | 1 |
AMRAAM-120A           |   | 1 | 2 |   | 2 | 1 |   |
AIAAM-Firebolt        |   | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |   |
                      |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
AIR TO GROUND:        |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
MRASM-AGM 109H        |   |   |   | 1 |   |   |   |
ASLAM BDM             |   |   |   | 1 |   |   |   |
CSW                   |   |   | 1 | 1 | 1 |   |   |
Maverick AGM-1        |   | 3 | 3 |   | 3 | 3 |   |
External Fuel Tank    |   |   | 1 | 1 | 1 |   |   |

Twin Gun, 1760 rounds

AIR TO AIR WEAPONS

AIAAM 196 Fire Bolt
Advanced interceptor, long range "fire and forget" air to air missile. These
are the successors to the AIM 54 Phoenix and are probably the most advanced
and sophisticated missiles in the world with a true radar homing.

weight - 980 lbs
range  - 250 km (130 miles)
speed  - Mach 5

AMRAAM 120A
Advanced medium range air to air missile "fire and forget" with active radar
homing also known as BVR (Beyond Visual Range) missile.

weight - 326 lbs
range  - 50 km
speed  - Mach 4

AIM9M-R SIDEWINDER
Short range AAM is the latest and most advanced of the Sidewinder family with
an imaging infra-red seeker. This builds a detailed image of the target
(similar to a Maverick) and isn't easily duped by counter measures.

weight - 190 lbs
range  - 11 miles
speed  - Mach 3

AIM132 ASRAAM-N
Advanced short range AAM. This is smaller and more agile than the Sidewinder
and has an advanced focal plane array homing radar (infra-red).

weight - 156 lbs
range  - 9 miles
speed  - Mach 3

BACK-WINDER 9X
Rear mounted short range air to air missile. A new weapon that overcomes the
problem of a rear firing missile system. It locks upon the attack radar of the
enemy fighter.

weight - 180 lbs
range  - 6 miles
speed  - Mach 3

AIR TO SURFACE MISSILES

MRASM, AGM-109H CRUISE MISSILE (also known as SOM's - Stand Off Missiles)
A base line airfield attack missile with DSMAC II (digital scene matching area
correlation) guidance and carrying a heavy payload of 58 TAAM (Tactical
Airfield Attack Missile). Bomblets are discharged from upward facing tubes
along fuselage. This is a launch and leave missile that flies for a few
hundred miles hugging the landscape and finally flies with great precision
down the centre line of the runway whilst ejecting the bomblets causing a row
of craters.

weight - 2825 lbs
range  - 370 miles
speed  - 650 mph

ASALM (Advanced Strategic Air Launched Missile)
Effective against all forms of surface target including those of the highest
degree of hardening. Also able to destroy AWACS type aircraft.

weight - 3100 pounds
range  - 700 miles +
speed  - Mach 3.5 to Mach 4.5

MAVERICK AGM 1 LASER AND TV
The latest generation of the Maverick family, the smallest of the fully guided
self-homing ASM's in use. An improved version of the AGM 65E, with infra-red.

weight - 484 lbs
range  - 25 miles
speed  - Mach 1.6

CSW (Conventional Stand-off Weapon)
Seen by the USAF as the best way to destroy hostile anti-aircraft defences and
armour moving behind FLOT (Forward Line of Troops). It can distinguish between
tanks and low value trucks or decoys and its smaller and much cheaper than the
MRASM. It is fitted with a PLSS (Precision Location Strike System) and has 20
warheads which separate over an area homing in on particular targets. These
are especially effective against formations of tanks and armour.

weight - 2700 lbs
range  - 30 miles
speed  - Mach 1.1

NOTE: Standard NATO Ground Forces have FOF devices (Friend or Foe), so aerial
launched "smart weapons" avoid them, such as the CSW and other cruise
missiles.

MISSIONS
The enemy vehicles in Retaliator have a dark-grey camouflage, whilst your own
forces are green/brown. enemy bombers are also a dark-grey. To differentiate
between enemy and friendly aircraft, only enemies show on your radar.
Similarly, the FOF (Friend or Foe) system prevents your from launching a
missile upon a friendly airborne target.

Note: there are 3 tanks in 1 battalion, and 3 planes per squadron.

All mission will only be deemed complete when your aircraft has completed the
mission and landed safely at an appropriate base.

ARIZONA TEST RANGE MISSIONS
Mission 1: Hit the two canvas targets in sector 7B.

Mission 2: A convoy of retired trucks are moving along the east-west
           highway. Destroy all truck in Sector 8A-8H.

Mission 3: Hit the freight trains on the rail-line in Sector A3.

Mission 4: Destroy the SAM sites and their radar control station in
           Sector 5D.

Mission 5: Hit the Test Bridge in the Yuscon firing range and avoid the
           electronic SAM simulators located in area F8.

Mission 6: Engage the Drone MiG-29B Fulcrum Fighters in your vicinity. Two
           must be destroyed.

Mission 7: Attack the mock-tank formations crossing the Nevada Plains in
           Sector 3A.

Mission 8: Destroy the industrial complex in Sector 1C

Mission 9: Destroy the airbase in Sector 4C and the main runway; drone
           fighters are located at this base.

Mission 10: Destroy the enemy command centre, avoiding the complex SAM
            network located in Sector 1E. This is perhaps the most
            difficult mission on the North American test range.

PACIFIC MISSIONS
War Update 1

1. "Scramble"
Two bandits have been located in Sector 4D closing in on your island base.
Engage and destroy.

2. "Firebolt"
The enemy has launched an aerial attack on the oil refinery on Vejan Island
(Sector 8D). Repel the enemy and destroy at least three fighters.

3. "Drop-in"
An enemy battleship has been detected in sector 4G Launch a surprise attack
using MRASM missiles, avoiding its radar network and destroy the battleship.

4. "Plunge"
Hit the enemy oil depot on the island of Zahiti (sector 1D).

War Update 2
1. "Splash"
The enemy has launched a full scale amphibious attack on Troy (Sector 8E) with
at least ten landing craft on the North Shore. These are escorted by a
squadron of Fulcrums. You must destroy the landing craft.

2. "Warmup"
Intelligence reports two enemy frigates are closing from the South in Sector
3B to reinforce the Red fleet. Give the a surprise welcome.

3. "Deep Heat"
The Leonid Brezhnev fleet carrier has retreated from the enemy fleet but has
launched a long range strike force closing in on the Solomos islands located
in Sector 4B. Engage all three hostile aircraft and destroy them.

4. "Beta-1"
The gigantic enemy super tanker Azov has to be crippled in a surprise
retaliator strike in Sector 4G. MiGs provide aerial cover.

War Update 3
1. "Revenge"
The battleship New Jersey has stormed into the scene and two enemy frigates,
the Kresta 2 and the Admiral Zozulya, have engaged her. Provide aerial cover
against incoming MiGs and engage the cruisers in Sector 7H.

2. "Arc"
The enemy has finally launched a full scale attack on Solomos with ten plus
ships to the South barraging the southern coast. Scramble and destroy the four
MiGs providing aerial cover for the fleet and hit any enemy ships.

3. "Strike Back"
The US fleet has arrived in Sector 5H, steaming towards your island bastion
led by the carrier JF Kennedy. Launch a counter strike at the enemy fleet,
avoiding SAMs whilst the MiGs engage the US Task Force. Destroy at least two
ships and return to base.

4. "Stamps"
You must attack and destroy the vital enemy gas plant and refinery on Zahiti
in Sector 1D.

War Update 4
1. "Knock Out"
The Leonid Brezhnev has been sighted in Sector 1G, with a support ship. Locate
and destroy.

2. "Fight Back"
A fierce enemy counter-strike has sunk three US ships and threatens the JFK.
Provide air support and destroy two enemy battleships in Sector F4.

War Update 5
"Hand Shake"
A meeting between the two fleets has been arranged to discuss peace terms on
the enemy battleship Leningrad, in Sector 4B. Provide an aerial patrol to
enforce an exclusion zone with a MiG, as intelligence reports a sabotage
attempt will be imminent...

MIDDLE EAST MISSIONS

War Update 1
1. "Bravo"
Destroy the tank brigade (3 tanks) crossing the border in Sector 5A.

2. "Bogie"
Two MiGs are closing in on your base sighted in Sector 6F. Engage and destroy.

3. "Alpha"
Destroy the radar tracking station in Sector 4D to provide an aerial corridor.

4. "Foxstrike"
Destroy the roadbridge in Sector 3F to hamper enemy reinforcements.

5. "Lizard"
An enemy armoured column of at least six trucks and four tanks is advancing up
the highway in Sector 4C. Stem the advance and obliterate the column.

6. "Charlie"
Launch a deep strike attack on the enemy airfield in Sector 2H

War Update 2
1. "Moonstruck"
Hit the industrial works in Sector 3B which provides ammunition to the Arab
forces.

2. "Rogue"
The power station in Sector 2F, east of the city needs to be knocked out.

3. "Pincer"
Refer to your War Update Map before commencing this mission, as it will inform
you of the whereabouts of two grey enemy tank battalions which are leading an
assault. destroy these six enemy tanks and return to base.

4. "Torch"
Destroy the tracking station in Sector 4A.

5. "Crossfire"
Destroy the enemy oil refinery in Sector 1F with your primary target, the
three oil holding tanks.

War Update 3
1. "Mayday"
Three enemy fighters are closing in on the capital. Break up the raid, destroy
all fighters and return to base. Move to Sector 5E to engage.

2. "Lord"
Two continuing tank battles are occurring along the front-line. Stem the enemy
divisions. refer to War Update Map on computer for the battle locations.

3. "Torture"
You must locate and demolish the rail-bridge in the lower Sector of 3B.

4. "Romeo"
Lac Mi-El tank farm in Sector F1 is assembling Russian T-80's imported in from
Russia. Raze the complex to the ground.

War Update 4
1. "Heat"
Information is sketchy at this time, but it is believed a large enemy road
convoy is located around the vicinity of Sector 1D. This comprises over 10
trucks and tanks. You must locate this convoy and destroy.

2. "Juno"
A large scale aerial force is massing over enemy territory and moving towards
the capital. Their target is uncertain but you must destroy four bandits and
hold them away from base. Vector South to Sector 3G.

3. "Warrior"
Destroy the chemical processing plant in Sector 1C, believed to be developing
chemical weapons.

4. "Gold"
The greatest tank battle of the war is raging (refer to War Update Map), with
all reserves being drawn up. Provide aerial support and destroy eight plus
tanks.

War Update 5
1. "Ajax"
Miscon has lifted the restriction on bombing the enemy capital in Sector 1B
and surrounding installations, and has made the international airport in
Sector 2A its primary target. Destroy the main runway and return to base.

2. "Dawn"
destroy the steelworks in Sector 1D, south west of the city, but make sure to
avoid any damage to the red Cross hospital based in the compound.

3. "Zeus"
The enemy has thrown everything into a new strike. fresh enemy armour has been
deployed to the front line (see War Update ) and is overwhelming the exhausted
armoured divisions. Provide aerial support and smash the lead tank battalion.

4. "Red"
The road and rail networks have been badly damaged consequently jeopardising
supply routes. Shortages to the front line are threatening our positions, so
you must provide aerial cover for a massive convoy moving from Tel-A-Von to
the front line against impending MiG attack. This takes place in Patrol Sector
7G.

War Update 6
1. "Standstill"
The situation is critical with all three countries industries smashed. The
massive El Alamein factory (Sector 1A) is the sole productive enemy plant.
Avoid the fierce SAM systems and destroy the complex.

2. "Vice"
The forces on both sides are reaching exhaustion as the war is becoming a war
of attrition. Fanatical enemy tank brigades in the relevant sector (see War
Update Map) are causing havoc with our resisting ground forces. destroy the
four leading tanks and the supply vehicles.

3. "Thunder"
The heavily pounded enemy air-forces have gathered from unknown runway strips
and are launching perhaps their last full-scale attack of the war. Vector
south to 4G to engage and destroy all Bogies - number unknown.

War Update 7
1. "Abyss"
On this day the war reaches its climax with the outcome unknown. A secret or
special range of mission will exist in this final chapter of the war.

EUROPE MISSIONS

War Update 1
1. "MiG Cap"
Zulu Alert: two incoming MiGs closing in on your base. Search, engage,
destroy. This is not a drill - repeat - this is not a drill.

2. "Bomb Cap"
Three enemy bombers are closing in on your base at low level, escort provided.
Vector 30 degrees for Bogey - engage and destroy.

3. "Intercept"
Two SU27 Flankers are crossing the border and are zig-zagging towards Huttgart
(Sector 8A). Engage and destroy.

4. "Tom Cat"
Three plus bandits are providing aerial support for advancing enemy mobile
divisions along the border in Sector 4D. Engage and destroy.

5. "Aggressor"
Provide close aerial support against advancing red army tanks for the army
group centre in Sector 6D, near Ziepen. Destroy the two tank brigades (6
tanks).

6. "Firehand"
Two enemy mobile divisions are engaging the British Seventh Centurion Tank
Division in the north of the country. Stem the advance and destroy the leading
brigade in Sector 8D.

7. "Ironhand"
Provide an aerial corridor along the southern border section by destroying the
three enemy SAM sites and radar sit near the Stein river in Sector 3D.

8. "Backbreaker"
In order to stem enemy rear movements and hamper rear supply lines, your
primary target is the key bridge Liepen in Sector 5E.

9. "Limelight"
The road convoys towards the front from Frunsroure, across the Liepen bridge,
must be destroyed (Sector 8F0.

10. "Linebacker III"
This is a deep strike retaliatory mission against the Red Army airfield of
Tranevora. In particular against its main runway and hanger areas in Sector
1G.

War Update 2
1. "Jawbreaker"
Destroy the bridge in the northern section on the Stein river (Sector 6D).

2. "Four Star"
Destroy the enemy supply dumps in Sector 2F

3. "Big Ear"
Destroy the radar tracking station and the SAM emplacement near Sector 7E.

4. "Deep Throat"
The enemy air force has been scattered to regional bases across their country.
Miscon has detected a large enemy presence near an airstrip in Sector 3H.
Destroy any airborne hostiles and the runway.

5. "Strike Out"
The enemy has launched its biggest bombardment of the war against all air
force bases. Five plus bandits are closing over the border - heading unknown.
Intercept and destroy. Vector to Sector 2C.

6. "Tin Can Alley"
Provide close air support for allied tank forces against a massive enemy
assault. Destroy the two leading enemy battalions (6 tanks). refer to War
Update Map for battle location.

War Update 3
1. "Iron"
Destroy the vital road bridge in Sector 8C, to prevent any enemy supplies
reaching the front.

2. "Titan"
Large enemy convoys are rallying towards the front. A massive amount of armour
is moving west in Sector 8G, with pontoons providing river crossing. Destroy
the convoy and return home.

3. "Snake Eye"
Fierce tank battles are continuing in various sectors (see War Update Map),
with French and British Northern Tank Divisions holding their ground. Provide
air support against three MiGs and destroy the leading enemy tank brigades in
both battles.

4. "Grind"
The enemies massive industrial complex in Sector 5H provides machine parts for
the Red Army war machine. Destroying this complex will cause great shortages
to the enemy.

5. "Lights Out"
Cripple the riverside power station in Sector 5H, destroying all cooling
towers which will disrupt enemy productivity.

6. "Fly-by"
A large number of allied interceptors have been downed by an enemy MiG-29
hunting Squadron. The three ace fighters are operating from the Alps in Sector
1D. This mission is self-explanatory!

War Update 4
1. "Operation Wolf"
A new squadron of MiG-29C Fulcrums have been located zig-zagging across the
border towards Nurberg. Intercept in Sector 5C and break the pack up.

2. "Avenger"
A ferocious string of land battles has left the front line NATO forces
exhausted with two fresh Warsaw Pact tank divisions engaging them (refer to
War Update Map for location). Halt the enemy and destroy at least ten tanks.

3. "Operation Thunderbolt"
Decimate the chemical factory in sector 7H and its two storage tanks.

4. "Operation Bear"
Attack the arms factory in Sector 2H, avoiding the SAMs located nearby.

5. "Express"
Constant convoys of railfreight are arriving hourly on the rail-lines from the
east to the enemy capital and the battle front. Destroy the rail-line and any
trains in Sector 4H.

6. "Untouchables"
A squadron of enemy Flanker bombers have destroyed several allied storage
depots near the front line and are closing in on the international airport in
Sector 7A. Engage and destroy.

War Update 5
1. "Venus"
The Red armies second air force has reinforced the depleted first army and has
launched the biggest aerial assault yet seen in the war, with six squadrons of
fighters causing havoc to NATO ground forces.Provide aerial cover for Huttgart
around Sector 7B against 3 closing MiGs.

2. "Venus 2"
Provide aerial cover from Nurbergs industrial complexes against the ominous
threat of the squadron of three MiGs in Sector 4B.

3. "Counter"
The massed NATO ground forces are now being pinned down by the new surge of
Enemy aerial dominance. Provide aerial support for the Second US Tank Corp in
the relevant sector (refer to War Update Map) and destroy any opposing tanks.

4. "Backache"
Launch a deep strike attack on the last main enemy bridge in Sector 7H to
cloak the enemy rear guard action.

5. "Trax"
The massive tank factory in Sector 8H is primary target. Rip out the main
building.

6. "Flame"
The huge storage depot in Sector 8H, conveniently located between a hospital
and a church, has fuel for the Warsaw Pact armies. Destroy a storage tank and
return home.

War Update 6
1. "Burst"
The hardest mission so far: hit the centre line of the international runway in
Sector 6H and engage any scrambled bandits. Avoid the dense SAM belts to the
west of the base.

2. "Mercury"
A rag-tag formation of fighters is closing over the border, towards your home
runway and intelligence believes cruise missiles may be carried on board.
Intercept and destroy the fighters and bring down any air-launch cruise
missiles.

3. Man Hunt"
The remnants of two massive armies are clashing in the relevant sector (see
War Update Map). Destroy enemy hardware in battle zone.

4. "On-line"
The nuclear power station south-east of the enemy capital is your target.
Destroy the cooling towers and main building, avoiding the reactor plant. This
will plunge the enemy into a total black-out in Sector 7H.

5. "Saturn"
A train carrying new tanks to the front has been located by satellite in
Sector 7H. Prevent the tanks from ever reaching the battlefield.

6. "Mars"
A heavily defended aircraft factory in Sector 8H has remained unscathed so
far, and is producing large numbers of enemy aircraft. destroy the main
building.

War Update 7 (the final update)
Your three missions are: No.1 Saviour, No.2 Retaliator, No.3 Hour Glass

These missions are all secret to protect the outcome of the war - refer to War
Update Map.

KEYBOARD CONTROLS

EJECT
Pressing this key once will place all systems into eject mode. This allows you
3 seconds to confirm by pressing the key a second time, which will then eject
you from the plane. If the key is not pressed within 3 seconds, all systems
will revert to normal mode.

Note: This key also acts as an 'escape' key on the menu selection screen to
abort/cancel any inputs.

FRONT
This gives you the cockpit view/display

REAR
This gives you the view from the inside rear of the craft.

LEFT
This gives you the view from the left side of the aircraft.

RIGHT
This gives you the view from the right side of the aircraft.

SATELLITE
This gives you an overhead view, taken as from a satellite positioned at
approximately 80,000 ft. Your aircraft is always at the centre point in this
view.

SOUTH-FACING
This gives you a fixed south-facing view from outside the aircraft.

ZOOM-IN
This gives you the facility, when using an exterior view, to zoom-in towards
your aircraft.

ZOOM-OUT
See Zoom-in.

BEHIND
This gives you an exterior view of the aircraft from the rear.

NORTH-FACING
See South-facing.

MFD 1/2/3
These keys act as toggles between the three different modes on each of the
three MFD displays. See Instrument Description section.

SUPERCRUISE
Pressing this key gives a instant thrust of 100%. This is usually used on
high-level flights only.

RPM -/+
These keys increase revs/thrust.

ECM ON/OFF
This key toggles the electronic counter-measures system. See Instrument
Description section.

CHANGE TARGET LOCK
This key will toggle the lock your missile has on a particular target. If
there are, say, three enemy targets on the screen, pressing this key will
alternate the lock-on between each of the three targets.

PAUSE
Pause the simulation at any time during flight.

WEAPON SELECTION
Pressing this key will cycle through all of the weapon systems you have
available on-board. In this cycle there will be the facility to revert to the
normal HUD display - 'non-armed' mode. The weapon you select will be
automatically armed and ready for launch.

AUTOPILOT
This key will toggle between manual flight and autopilot - see Instrument
Description section.

STEALTH
This key toggles Stealth mode on or off. See Instrument Description section.

FLAPS
This toggles flaps in or out. See Instrument Description section.

GEAR
This toggles between lowering and retracting the landing gear. See instrument
Description section.

HUD
This toggles the HUD (Head Up Display) on or off. See Instrument Description
section.

JOYSTICK/KEYBOARD/MOUSE
These keys will defer to the chosen control at any stage during flight.

BREAK LOCK
This key cancels the lock your weapon may be holding on a target.

COCKPIT
This key 'freezes' all cockpit displays when pressed, although functions will
continue as normal. All ESSENTIAL displays will remain visually active. Press
this key again to unfreeze.

BRAKES
This toggles the brakes on or off. See Instrument Description section.

FIRE/TRIGGER
This key emulates the Joystick/Mouse LH buttons and fires the appropriate
weapon, if armed. Note: with certain weapons, it is necessary to wait for them
to fix a lock on to a target - an appropriate symbol will appear in the HUD:
See HUD diagram.

LEVEL WINGS
This will automatically recover you from any bad stalls, rolls, etc. and will
level your craft out.

CHAFF
This releases the chaff. This effectively 'blinds' enemy radar and radar-
guided missiles.

FLARE
This releases a flare (decoy), used primarily to divert infra-red guided
missiles.

THE NEXT GENERATION COCKPIT SYSTEM (ECOP)
1-4: Flight Surfaces and control panels which are also colour coded and act as
damage control panels.

1. THE AUTO-PILOT
This key turns auto-pilot on or off. When operative the light is on green. The
auto-pilot flies you on your last setting, but does not avoid high ground and
mountains.

2. BRAKES
When your plane is on the ground the brake key turns on the landing gear
brakes on and off - in the air it turns the air brakes on or off. When the air
brake is extended or the gear brake is on, the break light will appear green.
If the brake light is red the the brakes are not operative, or are damaged. If
you exceed 70 mph on the ground whilst brakes are engaged, you will incur
damage to the landing gear.

3. FLAPS
The flap key turns the wing flaps out and in. When the flaps are out, the
aircraft slows down, gains lift and reduces stall speed. When out, the green
Flaps light will appear. High speeds can rip off the flaps if they are
extended out, causing serious wing damage above 360 mph. A yellow light will
warn you if you exceed 260 mph. Fatal damages are indicated in red text.

4. LANDING GEAR
The green landing gear light will appear when the gear is out and in the
landing position. When the gear is retracted the light is out. If you exceed
320 mph you will fatally damage your gear if it is out and at 240 mph a yellow
caution light will appear. If this occurs, you should either raise your gear
or slow down to prevent any further damage. A red light indicates fatal damage
or failure to your gear.

5-9: Systems Analysis

5. MASTER ARM LIGHT
This lights up when a selected weapon is armed and ready for launch (see
weapons).

6. STALL LIGHT
A stall occurs when the wings angle of attack becomes too acute. Unstable air
flows over the wing surfaces and reduces lift which generally causes the nose
to drop. Stall speed varies in different circumstances, depending on the
aircrafts flaps and altitude.

Note: The F-22 and F-29 computer system recovers from stalls automatically
       - all you need do is level out and bring your pitch back to normal.

7. RPM BAR
This shows the amount of thrust being applied. Each small bar represents 10%
increments of thrust. To increase and decrease thrust press the thrust key
(see keyboard). More thrust consumes fuel quicker.

8. THE FUEL BAR
This shows the amount of fuel left in the three internal fuel tanks of each
plane. This is represented in increments of 1000 lbs for each small bar shown
(if external fuel pods are carried, the fuel in these is spent first and then
the empty tanks ejected).

9-15: Warning Indicators (Yellow 196 Caution, Red 196 Danger).

9. FIRE
If there is an engine fire this light will flash red - it is not recoverable
and the pilot must eject.

10. FUEL (low)
If the level of fuel is below 2000 lbs a yellow caution light will appear. If
below 500 pounds a red flashing light will appear and below 200 lbs a solid
red light and a message will appear on the HUD.

11. ENGINE
The engine warning light will appear as a cautionary yellow if the RPM falls
below 50% in flight or if partial engine damage has occurred. If severe engine
damage occurs, the light will flash red and the pilot will have to eject.
Partial (yellow) engine damage allows you to limp back to base, but can get
worse if left unchecked. A solid red light represents turbine failure.

12. ALTITUDE
If you fly below 500 ft a yellow altitude warning light will appear, below 200
ft a red light will appear.

13. RADAR
If the radar is damaged partially or is faulty, a yellow caution light will
appear. If it is totally damaged or destroyed a red light will show.

14. WEP (Weapon Damage)
If the weapon system is damaged or jams on one particular weapon, the warning
light will appear appropriately.

15. COM (Communications)
If any communications fault occurs, a yellow warning light will appear. If
these faults are fatal (and irreparable) a red light will appear.

Note: The F-22 and F-29 have a computer self-diagnostics test and in some case
are able to track down and repair faults.

Only yellow caution faults e.g. some problems on RAD, WEP and COM can repair
automatically.

16. MESSAGES
Various text information is provided on this display, e.g. he type of enemy
missile approaching etc.

17-22: Enemy Threat Panel

17. LOCK
If a lock is fixed on your plane by enemy radar this light will appear.You can
attempt to break the lock with ECM and chaff, and shut down to 'stealth'.

18. LNCH
When an enemy missile launch occurs then there is a large bright flashing
launch light.

19. RWR (Radar Warning Receiver)
This has a fixed range of 24 miles and shows any threats, i.e. SAMs and enemy
planes (it is a crude horizontal radar).

When an object appears on this and is behind your plane then an audio signal
also sounds.

Note: RWR still operates in 'Stealth' mode, as it receives but does not emit.

20. THREAT
When the onboard ECM equipment detects a Fansong signal (Russian SAM Radar
Signal), you are presented with a yellow steady missile 'threat' light and
audio tone. If you are detected and the enemy radar has a target, the missile
warning light will flash and the tone will warble.

21. STEALTH
You have limited radar cloaking and can appear radar invisible if you fly
slowly and low and reduce all radar emissions from your craft, i.e. radar
shutdown. You can still be detected visually but it is a lot safer. An
indicator shows how vulnerable you are to radar emission.

Note: The radar and maps have a freeze mode, displaying a target and its
position whilst all radars are shut down.

22. ECM (Electronic Countermeasures Radar Jammer)
When activated the ECM light appears. The ECM 'blinds' radar-guided missiles
and stops them homing in on your plane. The ECM works better at long range.

23. ENGINE WARNING LIGHT
When the engine is powered up this light is activated until RPM reaches 20%.

24-32: The Multi Function Display Units.

24-26: MFD1

24. SYSTEMS
This provides flight details for fuel, RPM, speed and altitude.

25. WEAPON SELECTION SCREEN
This shows the number of weapons and type: which weapon is armed and selected
and it also shows the amount of chaff and flares remaining.

26. BVR RADAR
The Beyond Visual Range Radar is used for the medium and long range missiles.
It provides extra range than the horizontal radars and shows distant enemy
aircraft.

27-29: MFD2

27. FORWARD LOOKING RADAR
This gives a detailed infra-red display of the front of the plane, providing
data on the type of plane, its bearing and speed, whilst in combat.

28. MISSILE FLIR and TV
This provides a cockpit display of what the CSW, Maverick, MRASM and ASALM
sees via TV and forward looking infra-red cameras. This is relayed directly to
the cockpit showing the missile closing in on its target in 3-D perspective.

29. HORIZONTAL INDICATOR
This provides the pilot with information about the plane's roll from left to
right and at what angle it is banking.

30-32: MFD3

30. HORIZONTAL SITUATION RADAR
This radar provides a cross section view of the plane and all the area around
it, with a variable range indicator. This radar provides locations of SAMs or
enemy planes within its 40 miles range.

31. SATELLITE RADAR (Moving Map Display)
This shows a digital map of the world 40 miles around you. It provides terrain
locations of all enemy bases, factories and road/rail networks.

32. MMD (Moving Map Display with Direction Finder)
This is a computer generated display above the moving map which shows the
direction of the plane with a line indicator.

THE HEAD-UP DISPLAY (HUD)
The HUD can be toggled on or off (see keyboard). This will show you on a
constant basis: heading, air speed, altitude, "G-loading", weapon selected and
number of weapons remaining and the flight equipment currently in use. Other
symbols that will appear when appropriate are: gun sight and missile
sights.

SIMPLE CONTROL OF YOUR ATF
Here follows a very brief outline of how to land, take-off and, in simple
terms, control your aircraft. For a more in-depth view on the function of
other equipment, such as flaps, brakes etc. please refer to section headed,
"Instrument Description".

TAKEOFF
1. Start and build thrust up to 50%
2. Release brakes and steer slowly along the strip.
3. Increase thrust to 80-90% to eventually attain a takeoff speed of
   approximately 200 mph.
4. Pull gently back on the 'stick', which lifts the nose. After the plane
   lifts off the ground, retract landing gear before you exceed 300 mph.
5. Fly!

LEVEL FLIGHT
To achieve "level" flight, the pilot raises or lowers the nose until the
Ladderbar (in the HUD) shows 0 degrees.

LIFT
The amount of lift generated on the craft is dependant upon your airspeed.
Reducing speed reduces lift, making the craft descend - without lowering the
nose. Increasing speed elevates the aircraft.

"G"-LOADING
Represented on the HUD, this informs you of the gravitational force exerted
upon yourself and the plane, which varies according to speed and angle. If the
G-Loading exceeds about 8, you will be subjected to "blackout". If the
G-Loading is -3 or less, then you will be prone to "redout", as the blood
rushes to your head.

The most common way of inducing these G ratings is by generating a very
steep-banked turn at great speed, the combination of which will result in the
aforementioned blackout. If you level out immediately after a very high-angle,
high-speed ascent, then you will cause a minus-G-force which may result in a
redout.

ALTITUDE
The maximum altitude of the ATF is 75,000 ft (which is the approximate height
of the generated satellite view). To attain the required height to evade radar
detection, you need to fly at between 200-300 ft above the ground or the sea
level (dependant on the environment you are over).

LADDERBAR
Portrayed on the HUD, the Ladderbar indicates the angle of your aircraft in
relation to the horizon. Hence, the zero level indicator shows "level" flight.
Note that the Ladderbar Pitch Lines are always horizontal to the horizon, i.e.
when you roll, the Ladderbar will change angle accordingly in the HUD. The
Ladderbar is shown in increments and decrements of 10 degrees.

LANDING
1. Straighten the craft using the centreline of the runway as a reference.
    Maintain a speed of around 300 mph and a height of between 1500-2000
    ft. Lift the nose slightly to maintain level flight.

2. On approach, descend down to around 300 ft and reduce airspeed to around
   200 mph, lowering the flaps. It is advisable to lower your landing gear
   at this point. Remember to keep the centreline of the runway directly
   ahead of you, i.e. your central focal point of reference.

3. When your wheels touch the runway, reduce the throttle to zero and push
   forward on the joystick in order to lower the nosewheel down to the
   ground.

4. Apply the brakes and when the craft stops completely, the mission you
   have just undertaken is complete.

SCORING
In this simulation, there is no automatic promotion. It is up to your
discretion to decide whether you are skillful or experienced enough to promote
yourself to the relevant rank.

Your achievements will be based on the rank you have selected. If 1st Lt. is
taken as the 'base' rank, Captain will be awarded twice as many points for the
mission; Major, three times; Lt Col,five time and Colonel seven times as much.
It must be borne in mind though, that the higher the rank you select, the more
difficult will the mission be to complete.

Scores are given after each mission and Awards (if applicable) after each War
Update. Different mission will attain different scores - you will be awarded
proportionally more points the further you progress into the war.

MEDALS
1. Purple Heart - awarded if injured or killed in action.

2. Airmans Medal (AM) - awarded after War Update 1

3. Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) - awarded after War Update 2

4. Silver Star (SS) - awarded after War Update 3

5. Airforce Cross (AFC) - awarded after War Update 4

6. Medal of Honour (MOH) - awarded after War Update 5

---
Typed by MEZZO. Edited by PARASITE.